.. _i18n:

Internationalization (i18n)
===========================

Updating the translation files
-------------------------------

wger uses Django's translation infrastructure, but there are a couple of things
that need to be considered. First, you need to extract some translatable strings
from the database such as exercise categories and muscle names::

    python manage.py extract-i18n

Then, update your po files with the usual Django command (run this in the wger
sub folder, not the root one)::

    django-admin makemessages --all --extension py,html,tpl


and finally, you can compile them with::

    django-admin compilemessages


Adding new languages
--------------------

Besides adding the new translations to the locale folder, they have to be
activated in the Django settings file and in the application itself.

* **django:** add an entry to ``LANGUAGES`` in ``wger/settings_global.py``
  and create a new empty .po file with ``django-admin makemessages --extension py,html,tpl -l fr``
  (use the ISO 639-1 language code)

* **wger:** add the new language in the language admin page. For the short name,
  use the language code such as 'fr', for the long name the native name, in this
  example 'français'.

* **compile**: to use the new language files, the translation files have to be
  compiled. Do this by changing to the wger folder (so you see a ``locale``
  folder there) and invoking ``django-admin compilemessages``. You will also
  need to restart the webserver.

* **flag icon:** add an appropriate flag icon in SVG format in ``images/icons/flag-CODE.svg``
  in the static folder of the core application.

* **fixtures:** after having added the language in the admin module, the data
  has to be exported so the current language configuration can be reproduced.
  This is done with the ``filter-fixtures.py`` script:

  * while in ``extras/scripts``, export the whole database to a JSON file with::

      python ../../manage.py dumpdata core.language --indent 4 --natural-foreign > data.json

  * filter the database dump, this will generate a json file for each "important"
    module::

      python filter-fixtures.py

  * ``languages.json`` to the fixtures folder in core and optionally delete the json files::

      cp languages.json ../../wger/core/fixtures/
      rm *.json


Getting new languages
---------------------

If you have a local installation and new languages arrive from upstream, you
need to load the necessary data to the language tables in the database (note
that you'll need to reload/restart the webserver so the new po files are picked
up)::

  python manage.py loaddata languages
  python manage.py loaddata language_config

Please note that this will overwrite any changes you might have done from the
language administration module.


Server translations
-------------------

There are a handful of translations that are not part of the Django translation
files, but are saved in the db instead. These are things like categories and
muscles. These can be extracted to be used in the Django, react and flutter
applications with the following command::

  python manage.py extract-i18n

This command will generate the following files:

* ``wger/i18n.tpl``: this allows the django makemessages command to extract
  the strings so they can be translated.
* ``wger/i18n.tsx``: this should be copied to the react repository.
* ``wger/app_en.arb`` and ``wger/i18n.dart``: the content of this file should be copied to
  the end of the ``intl_en.arb`` file in the flutter repository.

Yes, this process is by far not optimal and should definitely be changed one
of these days, however these translations are *very rarely* updated so this
is kinda ok. The downside is that local instances can't easily add new
categories or muscles.